---
permalink: /research/
title: "Research"
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /research/
---

<span style="font-size:0.85em;"> At **Princeton**, I work on an industry-funded multi-institutional project to reduce biases at the ocean-atmosphere interface in climate models by leveraging observations and machine learning methods. We identify and model the systematic errors that arise from missing and inaccurate subgrid-scale parameterizations in an ocean general circulation model (GCM). The subgrid-scale errors are extracted as daily data assimilation increments from the GFDL's SPEAR-ODA system (Seamless System for Prediction and EArth System Research-Ocean Data Assimilation), which assimilates observed sea surface temperature and vertical profiles of temperature and salinity from the Argo dataset. The deep learning models are then trained to learn the nonlinear and low dimensional mapping between the ocean state and the data assimilation increments, thus parameterizing ocean model errors from local stratification, shear, and surface fluxes. The resulting deep-learned models are evaluated and interpreted by examining the relative importance of each predictor. These state-dependent neural networks form the basis for correcting systematic small-scale physical errors in an ocean GCM and can be used to improve the ocean model structure. The manuscript summarizing the technique, predictions, improvements over standard benchmarks, and interpretation is being prepared to be submitted shortly. </span>

<span style="font-size:0.85em;"> At **Los Alamos National Laboratory** (LANL), I investigated atmospheric and oceanic drivers of freshening of the Arctic Ocean using a large ensemble of coupled climate model simulations and an observationally forced ocean sea ice simulation using the Community Earth System Model (CESM) framework. The Arctic Ocean has accumulated an unprecedented amount of liquid freshwater (FW) in the last two decades. We identified the primary drivers of freshening and quantified the relative contribution of different sources using the freshwater budget analysis. We also distinguished between anthropogenically caused and naturally varying freshening signals by contrasting the response in two simulations. Thinning of the Arctic sea ice is largely anthropogenically forced and primarily contributes to the freshening of the Arctic Ocean. We also found that the climate system's natural variability strongly influences gateway freshwater transports via ocean circulation changes and affects the accumulation's magnitude, timing and spatial pattern. </span>

<span style="font-size:0.85em;">As a part of an internal LANL grant sponsored by the Center for Space and Earth Science, I developed a deep-learning model to forecast high-latitude climate variability on seasonal to interannual timescales. The end goal was to investigate physical processes that provide predictability on different timescales and understand the benefits of using deep learning. For this purpose, a convolutional neural network (CNN) that predicts subpolar North Atlantic Sea Surface Temperature (SST) from prior SST and upper ocean heat content fields was trained on data from a long preindustrial control simulation with the CESM. </span>

<span style="font-size:0.85em;"> I worked on an ocean modeling study that tracks freshwater from the Beaufort Gyre in the western Arctic Ocean and quantifies its effect on the North Atlantic Ocean's salinity. We found that during 1983-1995, the freshwater released from the Beaufort Gyre crossed the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and Davis Strait before freshening up the Labrador Sea by ~0.2 psu. In collaboration with NCAR, I am assessing the hindcast skill of an initialized decadal prediction large ensemble in predicting observed variations in the Arctic freshwater content. Such predictions often suffer from systematic errors called initialization-induced decadal drift. I worked on developing a new dynamical drift correction technique that removes bias and improves predictive skills over currently used methods. </span>

<span style="font-size:0.85em;"> My Ph.D. research at **Texas A&M University** included i) investigating the effect of sea surface temperature and synoptic variability on climate extremes over the continental United States using the Weather Research Forecasting model and ii) investigating aerosols' impact on tropical climate using the hierarchy of CESM simulations. In the first part, I studied the remote effect of SST interannual variability on precipitation and temperature extremes over the United States. The impact of propagating synoptic disturbances on the simulated mean state was also studied by changing the western lateral boundary conditions. The second part was carried out in collaboration with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. I studied coupled ocean-atmosphere processes over the tropical Pacific and how anthropogenic sulfate aerosols affect them. The possibility of sulfate emissions from Asia as a potential source of seasonal-interannual predictability through its impact on ENSO dynamics was explored in this work. As a part of this work, I performed and analyzed a large ensemble of coupled and uncoupled climate model experiments using CESM. I completed all the simulations on the local high-performance cluster from the ground up. </span>
